# The case of the missing clients

Summary: Why you really do need a proper IT strategy.

It was December 2003 and I was in Thailand for the second time on a
month's vacation.

I was dozing poolside late one afternoon, dreaming I was working, when
the bleeps of Old Faithful, my Nokia 3310, brought me back to reality,
and the sad fact that my first ice-cold Singha of the day had still
not arrived. What was that waiter doing to it, I wondered as I pressed
answer.

My friend Sean got straight down to brass tacks as was his way. 

"Mate's got a problem.", Sean barked down the phone. 

"Haven't we all!", I snapped back, disgruntled with being awoken and
the fact that my beer appeared to be in the process of being imported
from Laos. 

"So what is the problem?", I said, softening slightly as Sean was one
of my best mates.

"Some problem in IT". 

Sigh. I should have known better.

"Why do you think I can help?". 

"Well, you're something in IT aren't you?". 

"WTF?", I screamed. 

I heard a sharp intake of breath on the other end of the phone. 

"No, not you Sean. The waiter here has got my beer and I can see him
wandering around down the other end of the pool - and I'm the only one
here!"

I heard Sean cackling to himself like a loon.

I was furiously waving at the waiter, trying to attract his attention.

"OK, OK Sean. I'm coming down your way to see Somchai about that condo
anyway. I'll pop in."

Still chuckling to himself Sean hung up. 

The waiter finally arrived with a warm beer. There was only one thing
for it. I asked him to get me another. He marched off muttering in
Thai and probably thinking dark thoughts, but by then I was thinking a
few dark thoughts of my own.

*

Two days later, bright and early, I found myself in a cramped office
just off Sattahip shipyard opposite Dave. Dave had the look of a
kicked bloodhound. If Dave was Chicken Licken, then I figured not only
the sky had fallen on his head, but the entire universe had imploded
into the bargain. The bags under Dave's eyes told of sleepless nights
and a tale of woe. Things turned out to be bad for Dave. Very bad.

"The thing is the girls say they don't know who our clients are any
more", Dave babbled.

Those were not words you want to hear before your first cuppa of the
day. Dave seemed to ponder his last words at length, as if rolling
them around in his brain would provide a solution.

"So are you using a CRM system? Custom database? Did someone drop the
database accidentally? Backups?"

Dave looked as if I'd just asked him to decipher a bunch of
hieraglyphs, that I'd sneakily turned upside down when he wasn't
looking.

"Spreadsheet?", I squeeked out in a voice three octaves higher than
usual.

Nothing. Not a sausage of comprehension from Dave. Look, if you wanted
a tank cleaned, no matter how huge, or God forbid your pipes plunged,
or you wanted to rent an enormous crane, and a blessed toolshed to go
with it, then Dave was your man. But, the Lord bless him, he was
absolutely flipping clueless about anything, and I mean ANYTHING, to
do with computers.

My lips felt dry and cracked as my tongue worked furtively over
them. I really needed a cold one. It looked like I was on my own on
this one. I would do what I could.

I left Dave pondering the vagaries of life, and walked out into a
courtyard. A few men dressed in boiler suits were standing in the
shade watching me. A couple of Toyotas sat idle. On the other side of
the courtyard was a single story office block. I headed over in search
of liquid refreshment - pretty much anything would do.

The staff in the office were all Thai, and nearly all female, as is the
way there. They dealt with accounts, sales and marketing, purchasing
and so on. 

As is typical in nearly every office I've been to in Thailand the fact
that a strange foreigner just wandered in off the street didn't seem
to faze them at all. They brought me a glass of ice-water without me
asking for it, and smiled a lot before plucking up the courage to try
out their English. The usual "Where you from?", "What you do?"
questions.

I'd tried my limited Thai on Thais before and the results were not
good. At least they were great at turning the whole room into
paroxysms of laughter, but at actually getting anything across I was
hopeless - it was the tones, or at least that's my story and I'm
sticking to it.

I noticed one of the desks in the office was empty. A girl with the
very un-Thai name of Carol seemed to be the nominated spokesperson
when navigating the treacherous waters of dealing with farang.

"Carol, who sits there?"

"There Jom."

"Where is Jom?"

"Jom gone."

"Where?"

"Jom gone."

Carol's tone indicated that was an end to the matter. I smiled at
Carol as best as my cracked lips would allow me to.

"Carol. I am helping Mr. Dave. Can I switch this computer on?"

Carol nodded vigorously. 

Windows 98 crawled into life on what must have been the world's
slowest computer. I glanced at my fake Rolex. It took a full ten
minutes to boot.

There was no password protection enabled on the machine, so I clicked
Internet Explorer and waited another ten minutes. 

I must have really offended someone important in a previous life I
thought to myself.

The whole room was holding its breath. Curiosity was etched into the
audience's perfectly made up faces. 

"What you do Mr. Tony?"

It was the very question I was asking myself right then. If I'd had a
clue myself I would have been happy to have enlightened them.

I had a quick look through the browsing history. Personal Yahoo email
account and a penchant for designer handbags. The fog was starting to
lift.

"Carol. Can you give me Jom's phone number please?"

*

It was a few days later when I met up with Jom in a restaurant just
off the main drag down from Bangkok. She had excellent English and was
obviously as smart as a whip. She'd been working at Dave's company for
five years. She'd handled the sales and marketing more or less by
herself. And she'd been really, really good at it from what I had been
able to work out.

The thing was she had used her personal Yahoo email account to manage
and communicate with pretty much all Dave's customers - and there were
thousands of them. No one had told her not to.

When she'd got a better offer at a rival company she'd upped and
left - and understandably had taken her personal Yahoo email account
with her. The other girls in the office just knew that Jom could give
them the details of customers if and when they needed them. When Jom
had left, the company had been up the proverbial creek. All but
incommunicado, at least with customers.

I put the spoon down on a particularly spicy Tom Yum and pushed an
envelope stuffed with a month's wages across to Jom with one
finger. It grated a bit, but then I blamed Dave really, and I thought
he deserved to learn a lesson or two, and that list was worth way more
than Jom's monthly wages. The thought of that list ending up in a
klong was too much to bear.

Jom smiled a multi-megawatt smile - that smile could probably have
outshone Times Square. Jom slid a blue three and a half inch disk
across the table. It had a Hello Kitty sticker and "Customer" written
on it in pink felt tip pen.

"Thanks Jom", I said, and tucked back into the Tom Yum.

*

Bangkok December 2003. Heading down to Chon Buri...

![bangkok days](./images/bangkok_days.jpg "Bangkok")

---

* Published: 2019-03-30 07:31:25 UTC
* Updated: 2019-03-30 07:31:25 UTC
* UUID: F6DE85A3-91FF-4A64-8603-62B23D78A65E


