# On missed opportunities

Summary: Some thoughts on some of the bigger opportunities missed
along the way.

I was reflecting on missed opportunities recently. Back in the 80s I
did a fair bit of Z80 programming. I knew more about the Zilog CTC
than was healthy for any human. I wrote the software part of my final
project on the Sinclair Spectrum. A couple of friends were writing
games for the Speccy and needed another assembly language
programmer. They wanted to know if I'd joined them. I was more into
practical electronics back then and wasn't overly interested in
assembly language programming or games, so I declined. They went on to
start their own games business and did really well. The games industry
in the UK boomed. I ended up driving around the bush in Africa fixing
telemetry gear. Sigh.

And then sometime around 1992 or so there happened this magical realm
of the Web. I was very familiar with the Internet having been using it
since 1981 via JANET, the Joint Academic Network, which was part of
the Internet backbone. But this web thing? I thought HTML sucked, had
no interest in dodgy web pages and sidescrollers, and was much more
interested in neural networks, which I thought were going to be REALLY
big. My friend Liam was thinking of starting a consultancy to build
websites for companies - he wanted to know if I'd join him, but, oh
no, I had my neural networks and was getting interested in OS
internals. Neural networks went nowhere. And that web thing?

Then in 1994 I build this little curiosity using a Texas Instruments
DSP developer board, which used ADPCM to encode speech waveforms and I
sent packets over the Uni network, and then back to a decoder and D/A
converter, and wow, speech over the Internet. I even built the little
audio amp myself which was a real gem with an LM318 I bought from
Maplin back when component shops were a thing. Sometime around 2003
Skype came out - sadly nothing to do with me!

In 2006 I booked a hotel (Northam Suites) in Penang from UK. It was a
horrible experience. I had to print off a Word document, fill it out
by hand, and then fax, yes fax, it back to the hotel. I thought -
there must be an easier way. Armed with a pile of PHP books I wrote a
simple web app that would take hotel bookings over the web. It sat
there for months in a half-finished state. Then when I went
contracting I had a terrible time making bookings with B&Bs. I would
ring them up and get an answerphone, and they would never ring
back. It was painful. So I turned my hotel booking web app into a B&B
booking app. You can guess what happened with that. And in 2008 AirBnB
was founded and is now worth about $38 billion or so.

I could go on. And on. And on...

Now don't get me wrong, I'm not depressed about this at all. I can
write all this with a smile on my face. Fame and fortune was never for
me, and it takes more than a good idea to get you there anyway. 

There is actually some good news in all of this. What you realize is
that opportunities are like the number 42 bus - there's always the
next one coming along!

---

* Published: 2019-04-11 09:30:00 UTC
* Updated: 2019-20-11 09:30:00 UTC
* UUID: 02C0A677-FC99-4729-8AFD-7B88B2756C80
