# On buying my first smartphone

Summary: Some thoughts on taking the plunge and becoming a smartphone
owner.

I blame the snow. It was 5.30am and very cold and dark. I hadn't had
the first coffee of the day and was feeling it. I pitched up at Kemble
railway station to find all the trains had been cancelled. I drove
over to Swindon in horrible conditions and luckily there was a train
running to London. When I got to London I managed to get completely
lost - I exited Moorgate tube station by the "wrong" exit and had no
idea where I was. The guy I asked for directions whipped out his
smartphone, checked Google maps, and soon had me heading in the right
direction. That night in the hotel the Internet crapped out while I
was in the middle of checking email.

Enough was enough...

I've put off buying a smartphone for a very long time. That's funny
because I actually worked on smartphone software before smartphones
even existed. We were indeed writing software for a type
of phone that did not even exist in research labs. This was late
90s. MS-DOS wasn't yet extinct back then. The iPhone was still more
than ten years away. So I'm not a Luddite.

Back in the 90s there were Nokia dumb phones around but I just didn't
want one. Then one night the MG broke down again and I had to walk
about 3 miles to call the AA, and then walk back again. The AA didn't
turn up. Eventually I got the car going - there was a little float
valve in the carb that had come loose. There I was on the side of the
A3, gone ten at night, clutching a small lamp and cursing mechanical
systems.

Enough was enough...

It was 2001 and I bought one of the new-fangled Nokia 3310s. I still
have the same mobile number I got back then. By complete chance it was
a very easy number to remember, so I stuck with it. I remember the
shop assistant saying to me at the time, oh that's a nice one to
remember. She was right.

Sometime in 2003 I then bought a Nokia 3510i, which was more or less
the same as a 3510 but had a colour display and rubbery buttons. It
was a cool little phone and I used it for many years.

Then in 2007 the iPhone came out. A good friend bought one soon after
and no longer wanted her Nokia 6300. I grabbed it. A nice freebie. I
used that for ten years. Then they brought out the new Nokia 3310 in
2017 and I got a bright yellow one as a present from the same friend.

And then that terrible day with snow and no trains and wandering in
the city with no clue as to where I was, not to mention the bad
Internet...

I ended up splashing out on a reconditioned iPhone 7. One of the first
apps I put on was Trainline. Then I made sure I had Maps. Gmail,
Slack, Oyster card, Starbucks soon followed. Notes also has a very
useful, but little known, document scanner, great for capturing
receipts, and I can convert to PDF and save on iCloud, ready for
uploading to the expense system.

I like iMessage too - at least it's a really nice way to communicate
with other people on iPhones for free. However, I had issues with
sending photos to people who don't have iPhones. I put Viber on to fix
this problem. 

I got a couple of chess programs on there too. Stockfish is
wonderful. I got the Lichess app too - mainly for the "puzzle of the
day". 

FlightRadar24, one of my favourite websites, is now on the phone as an
app. It's just one of the most awesome things ever.

The smartphone also puts the Internet in my pocket. 4G turns out the
to pretty good. I can even tether my Kindle Fire to the iPhone for
Internet access while out and about.

So with all this smartphone goodness why didn't I buy a smartphone
before?

Two reasons: security, cost.

Security is still probably my biggest concern. Your phone knows a lot
about you - including your location, your voice, your contacts, and of
course your phone number. If you do social media they gather more data
on you. You do need to be aware of how much personal data you are
putting out there.

Cost turns out to be less of an issue these days. Well I was not going
to fork out £1,100 for an iPhone X. I got the reconditioned iPhone 7
for £399 from GiffGaff. It's 128K and it looks like brand new although
it was classed as "Very Good". There's not so much as a scratch on
it. With a £10 a month Goody Bag from GiffGaff I have virtually
unlimited communications - unlimited SMS, unlimited voice, and 3GB
data. I will probably save far more than £10 a month on my land-line
phone bill - I was still using that to call landlines and mobiles. Now
I just use the iPhone - more or less for free.

All in all I am really pleased to be a smartphone owner - security
issues aside. I should probably have taken the plunge years ago...

## Resources

- [FlightRadar24 Wikipedia page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flightradar24) - a fascinating read.
- [FlightRadar24 website](flightradar24.com) - the actual website. You can find the app in the relevant app store.

---

* Published: 2018-04-20 05:20:43 UTC
* Updated: 2018-04-20 05:20:43 UTC
* UUID: 903C8C72-2E79-4705-B56F-8DD3216C8C2B

