# About

Hi, I'm Tony. 

This website holds a few thoughts on various technical topics. I felt
like I needed a place to keep various notes I was accumulating and I
decided to ~~share~~ inflict my ramblings on others through this
site. Sorry about that!

**Please note this site is not meant to be taken too seriously! I have
enough "serious" writing in my day job thanks very much!**

You can also read this website directly in [my
GitHub](https://github.com/tbedford) if you want to. I also store the
tools used to build this site there. I tend to like to know how things
work, so I generally prefer to take the DIY approach to things like
websites - so no fancy-pants Wordpress site here.

I am a big believer in "incremental improvement" so expect to see that
in play here.

## Technical interests

I have a wide range of technical interests that includes embedded and
real-time systems, operating systems, data-driven websites, and
business process automation.

## Coding

I have been programming on various systems since 1981. I started back
then using VAX-BASIC and Z80 assembly language. I have written code
since then in a variety of languages. 

I once wrote an oil rig data aquisition system in
TurboBASIC. TurboBASIC allowed event-driven programming (long before
Node) through the use of `ON KEY k GOSUB s` and `ON TIMER t GOSUB s`
constructs, without any assembly language. It's still one of the most
productive languages/environments I have ever used. How things have
changed!

I have been programming in C, on and off, since around 1987, when I
learnt with a copy of Turbo C v2.0 and the Peter Norton's Guide to the
PC. That was pretty much everything you needed to know back then. I
most recently wrote a couple of experimental memory allocators in C
after a roughly ten year hiatus from the language.

I have been using Python on the side for around 3 years, mostly for
web scraping, HTML processing, and spreadsheet manipulation.

What my desktop typically looks like:

![Screenie](./images/screenie.png "Screenshot")

Update: More recently I have been using VSCode a lot and love it!

## Current employment

I'm a technical writer at [Nexmo](https://developer.nexmo.com/team),
specializing in writing docs for software developers. Nexmo has an
amazing API and tools for interfacing with the Vonage network.

## Past employment

As a contract technical writer I've worked for ARM, Fotango, The Open
University, Alfresco Software, and Cambridge Silicon Radio (now
Qualcomm).

I've been a permanent technical writer for companies such as
Criterion Software (now EA), Tao Group, Oracle(MySQL), Sun
Microsystems(MySQL), and Alfresco Software.

I also have extensive experience as a technical trainer. Over the
years I've delivered courses on operating systems and Java technology
at Sony (HQ Tokyo), Motorola (Schaumberg, Chicago and Austin, Texas),
Sun Microsystems (Culver City), NTT DoCoMo (San Jose), Sharp Labs
(Portland), and even Amiga (yes, _that_ Amiga). 

I also designed and delivered a course on Embedded C for Nokia
(Camberley, UK), back when Nokia were numero uno.

I feel I've been really lucky to have a varied and interesting
career. One of the highlights was working for Tao Group, with a couple
of breaks, for nearly ten years. We built a complete operating system
from scratch, with all the tools, documentation and training. Our
market was embedded devices and particularly "smart phones" - this was
back before either iOS and Android, in fact, before smartphones! It
was very difficult to convince manufacturers that the smartphone was
the future - then the iPhone happened and the world was changed
forever.

## Me

And here's me being photo-bombed by a mermaid: ;)

![tony](./images/johnny_starbucks_resized.jpg "Tony")


## Contact

My contact details are on my [Contact page](./contact.html). 

Please get in touch!

