# Coffee and Code

**Website News**

**[2019-05-11]**

You can try out a very primitive version of the new website software here:

http://tutubi-server.herokuapp.com/

When I say primitive I am not exaggerating, but the basics are there.

Most importantly I can now handle GFM code blocks without issues - or
at least I fixed the issues with escaping that had been very
problematic:

http://tutubi-server.herokuapp.com/content/calculating-entropy

I also just added support for images too. Images are hosted on
Neocities! Note however one of the design requirements was that you
should be able to read the source (with images working) in GitHub and
that objective has also been achieved! 

If you've not tried it, Neocities features a command line tool that
easily allows you to upload images to a neocities site. Works like a
charm:

http://tutubi-server.herokuapp.com/content/about

After some reservations with my design I think Tutubi will work quite
nicely for my new website (not sure yet about other applications). I'm
sure I will run into more issues (there have been many) but it will
get there if I keep plugging away.

Sadly, I have a long list of new articles (yes actual content) that
I've not been making progress on as I've been focusing on Tutubi code
in my spare time. I have made some progress on pieces about app
configuration, JSON, and another in my series on financial
calculations. Getting there slowly. Hang in there please - I am hoping
this new content will be available on the new site next month!

Just a heads up - the URL for the new site will be:

https://tonys-notebook.com but it's not live yet!

**[2019-04-29]**

I got the initial versions of the Tutubi server and client up and
running a couple of weeks ago. They were rough, but basically did what
was intended. I then got very busy with work, and then was very busy
working in the house. Over this last weekend for example I put
together five large pieces of furniture from Ikea, with more on the
way! However, I did finally manage to look into Heroku as I need to
know more about that for work - I am planning to get my Nexmo event
logger/proxy up there at some point - that is going to be really
useful for testing my Nexmo apps. The end result, I was able to get
the Tutubi server up and running on Heroku. Being new to Heroku there
were a few gotchas, but that just makes for more content on this site!
I also have a couple of articles in the pipeline, but will probably
publish those on the new site - stay tuned for more info in the coming
weeks. Thanks for hanging in there!


**[2019-04-11]**

In case you've not being watching the articles page or subscribed to
my Atom feed (and according to Inoreader there are three people
subscribed!) you may have missed my recent flurry of articles (OK
perhaps flurry is over-egging it a bit). The one I've had a fair bit
of feedback on is the John Wick one. If you've watched the second
installment in the franchise you'll get the idea of what I was trying
to do there.

In other exciting news (and yes, I hope you are sitting down for this)
I have started, at long last, to write the next installment of the
software to run this site. The beginnings of the code are up in my
GitHub, the project is called Tutubi (pronounced 2-2-bee). You can
read more about it there. Well I thought that was exciting news, so
there.

**[2019-03-05]**

First blood. The first article of 2019 is finally up. Sorry it took so
long.

**[2019-01-04]**

Happy New Year! I hope you all had a relaxing festive period!

**A quick look back over 2018**

It was a hell of a year which saw me start by spending a month in the
Philippines and then take on a new job at Nexmo. I had to hit the
ground running at Nexmo, but luckily I've had some experience of doing
that over the years. As well as doing a ton of work on the Nexmo
Developer Platform, I also moved house! In summary 2018 was a lot of
hard work, but worth it. I also managed to put out 21 articles on this
website. Website traffic has exceeded my expectations for such a
remote corner of the web - I checked this morning and a few days ago I
was getting around 150 unique visitors a day. That's far more than I
had anticipated. In terms of content, my target is 24 articles a year,
and I didn't quite hit that, although I did write a couple of
additional articles for the Nexmo blog. One would always like to write
more, and I had no shortage of ideas, but time was just not on my
side - if you have ever moved house while holding down a full-time job
you'll understand!

**Where are we going in 2019?**

As far as this website is concerned I expect things to tick along as
they have been. As I learn interesting (to me) technical topics I will
add notes here. I am keeping my article target at 24 - if I can hit
that I'll be doing well I think!

All the best for 2019 and thanks for reading!

**[2018-12-13]**

I added an article on the Doom Zone Memory Manager.

I also managed to put together a festive piece using Nexmo and Python
for the [Nexmo
blog](https://www.nexmo.com/blog/2018/12/03/dial-a-christmas-carol-with-nexmo-and-python-dr/).

**[2018-11-05]**

Fixed Emacs article. New config works fine both in Terminal and
Desktop on Mac.

**[2018-11-03]** 

A few new articles added recently, including a really bad one about
Emacs config. Sorry about that. Anyway, I updated my Contact page as
well so please send your complaints in!

**[2018-11-01]**

So good news and bad news. I have recently published a couple of
articles - that's the good news. The bad news is for some reason I
can't yet figure out, the syntax colouring I used seems to be broken
but only for a few pages. I will look into this over the new day or
two. In the meantime enjoy the new articles. UPDATE: Now
fixed. Highlight JS does not like code blocks without a `class`
specifier. Quick fix is to always specify a language in the Markdown
codeblock. If you have one codeblock that does not have the
language/class specified, it seems to prevent highlighting for all
other codeblocks on the page.

**[2018-10-13]**

It's not happening is it! July was the last time I wrote some
articles. I have though been extremely busy. I did manage to put
together a piece on using [Nexmo's Audit API with
Python](https://www.nexmo.com/blog/2018/10/09/get-nexmo-audit-events-with-python-dr/)
in addition to rewriting our Messages and Dispatch API docs and doing
a bunch of other work. If you are fairly new to Python or Nexmo you
can probably learn something from it I hope. 

**[2018-07-30]**

Another month gone! Wow! 

I did manage to get a couple of pieces published this month. I also
updated my about page. The material on Philippines was a little out of
place so I removed it. Timmy, bless him, got edited too. The blog was
originally meant to cover various topics, but seems to have defaulted
to a "yet another boring tech blog", so the About page now reflects
that.

The big plans to actually push the blog to the next level have not
materialized sadly. I have been very busy with work and "real life". I
do hope to get a couple more pieces published in August - we will see.

**[2018-07-05]**

Well I did not manage to get out any articles last month, although I
have a few in the draft state. I have been incredibly busy at
[work](https://developer.nexmo.com/team), and also had a trip to NYC
in there too. Plus I am going through the pain of buying a
house. Still I did publish double my quota in May so I don't feel
completely horrible.

This month I hope to get a couple of those draft/idea pieces brushed
up and published. We will see. The numbers continue to be quite strong
(much to my surprise) with about 21,000 page views to date. Not huge,
but more than my expectations.

I have now more or less completely switched from Emacs to VS Code and
am loving it. I still use Emacs from time to time on the command
line. VS Code continues to impress and let's hope things stay that
way.

In other news I am looking forward to Fabien Sanglard's Doom book. I
am especially looking forward to seeing how Fabien handles the Doom
Zone memory allocator, although I expect most people will be more
interested in the rendering chapter.

**[2018-05-04]**

I was pleased to see I managed to exceed my target quota of articles
for last month, despite being incredibly busy with my new job. I
expect to perhaps do as many as five articles this month, but we will
see.

Sometime early this morning I wrote the very first lines of what will
be the new website. I think this news probably warrants an article in
its own right. I can reveal a few things. It will be a Flask web
app. It will use Markdown as the source file format, and it will most
likely be hosted on Heroku. There will be new features such as tags,
comments, and a better design. Actually the core design - a pipeline
of processing stages on the Markdown and HTML source will stay. Those
Bash shell scripts really have to go though!

The other shocking news is I've been edging away from using
Emacs/Magit and have been using Visual Studio Code a lot more. It has
proved suprisingly wonderful to use. Surely that deserves an article!
Still, Emacs will still be my go to editor for the smaller tasks and
when I log into my test servers.

The stats for the site continue to climb ever upward. Thank you for
your support, and I'm glad some of you find my ramblings of some
interest.

**[2018-02-28]**

Well after just short of a month in the Philippines I am back. It was
a great holiday although we did get hit by typhoon Basyang. The
typhoon season is supposed to end in November, so we hadn't been
expecting that! It is also something of a shock to come back from 30C
to colder climes - it was MINUS 7C out there this morning! Watch out
for new articles AND new photos (check Updates below for details)!

**[2018-01-16]**

Happy New Year! It's been a little quiet here as I have been working
through some Udemy courses. I have also been prepping for my upcoming
Philippines trip. I really am excited to be attending PyCon
Philippines this year. However, I do expect things to pick up on my
return, starting with a review of some of the courses I have been
doing and also a review of the PyCon Philippines event. I also have
some exciting new projects in mind! Stay tuned! 

---

